TrueSkill 2: An improved Bayesian skill rating system

    Tom Minka        Ryan Cleven      Yordan Zaykov
Microsoft Research  The Coalition   Microsoft Research

                    March 22, 2018

                                                            Abstract

            Online multiplayer games, such as Gears of War and Halo, use skill-based matchmaking
        to give players fair and enjoyable matches. They depend on a skill rating system to infer
        accurate player skills from historical data. TrueSkill is a popular and effective skill rating
        system, working from only the winner and loser of each game. This paper presents an
        extension to TrueSkill that incorporates additional information that is readily available in
        online shooters, such as player experience, membership in a squad, the number of kills a
        player scored, tendency to quit, and skill in other game modes. This extension, which we
        call TrueSkill2, is shown to significantly improve the accuracy of skill ratings computed
        from Halo 5 matches. TrueSkill2 predicts historical match outcomes with 68% accuracy,
        compared to 52% accuracy for TrueSkill.

1 Introduction

When a player wants to play an online multiplayer game, such as Halo or Gears of War, they
join a queue of waiting players, and a matchmaking service decides who they will play with. The
matchmaking service makes its decision based on several criteria, including geographic location
and skill rating. Our goal is to improve the fairness of matches by improving the accuracy of
the skill ratings flowing into the matchmaking service.

    The skill rating of a player is an estimate of their ability to win the next match, based on
the results of their previous matches. A typical match result lists the players involved, their
team assignments, the length of the match, how long each player played, and the final score of
each team. A skill rating system must make assumptions about how these match results relate
to player skill. We follow previous work by representing these assumptions as a probabilistic
generative model, that is, a process that generates random player skills and random match results
from the skills. Bayesian inference in this generative model gives the optimal skill ratings under
the assumptions.

    A skill rating system is only as good as its underlying assumptions. This paper focuses on
making skill ratings more accurate by making better assumptions. We describe the process by

                    1
which we arrived at our generative model, how to evaluate the model, and how to estimate the
parameters of the model.

    A variety of different generative models can be found in previous work. For example, Dan-
gauthier et al. [2008] extended TrueSkill for two-player games by giving each player an additional
number describing their ability to force draws, which could evolve over time. Glickman [2001]
used a model for two-player games where each player has an additional number describing their
skill volatility, which could evolve over time. Chen et al. [2016] used a model where each player
had a different (but unchanging) skill rating for each character that they could play in the game.
Menke et al. [2006] used a model that accounted for map and server effects on the outcome of
matches. Chen and Joachims [2016] used a model where `skill rating' was a vector of numbers,
to allow intransitive dominances between players.

    Unfortunately, none of these models have the qualities needed by a modern game studio.
After consulting with the makers of Gears of War and Halo, we have found that their top
priorities are:

   1. Support for team games. The system should support matches with any number of teams
       and any number of players on each team.

   2. Changeable skill ratings. It must be possible for a player's skill rating to change, no
       matter how many matches they have played in the past. This ensures that players receive
       meaningful feedback on their performance.

   3. Compatibility with an existing matchmaker. Existing matchmakers assume skill is de-
       scribed by a single number. Players can easily understand a single ordered skill ranking.

   4. Aligned incentives. The skill rating system should create incentives that align with the
       spirit of the game. For example, consider a team game where players cooperate to achieve
       a goal. An improperly-designed skill rating system could encourage players to impede their
       teammates. As another example, consider a system that increased skill rating according
       to the number of times a player healed themselves. This creates an incentive for a player
       to repeatedly injure themselves so that they could be healed. In general, the more control
       that a player has over a quantity, the less useful it is for skill rating.

   5. Minimal training data requirements. The most important time to have good matchmaking
       is immediately after the launch of a game. Unfortunately, this is also when there is the
       least amount of data available to train a model. Even if the game has a large player base,
       there tends to be a small amount of training data per player.

   6. Low computational cost. Skill updates are done on servers hosted by the game studio, and
       skill ratings are stored in a database hosted by the game studio. This means that skill
       representations should be small and updates should be cheap.

   7. Minimal tuning. Game studios generally do not have personnel with the knowledge and
       free time available to tune the skill rating system after launch. But they do make plenty
       of other changes to the game, such as adding new game modes, new player abilities, and

                                                            2
       re-balancing game mechanics. The skill rating system needs to automatically adapt to
       these kinds of changes.

Our solution is to start with the TrueSkill model, which already enjoys properties 1­6, and make
judicious changes that preserve these properties. A skill rating in TrueSkill2 is a single number
with the same meaning (in terms of win rate) as a TrueSkill rating. Thus any matchmaker
that accepts classic TrueSkill ratings also accepts TrueSkill2 ratings. TrueSkill2 only changes
the way that skills are inferred from historical data. Property 7 is achieved by performing
automatic parameter estimation over a batch of historical data. TrueSkill2 operates in two
modes: an online mode that only propagates skill ratings forward in time, and a batch mode
that infers parameters and skills over all time (also known as TrueSkill Through Time). Both
modes are based on the same probabilistic generative model--they only correspond to different
approximations to the Bayesian posterior.

    Briefly, the classic TrueSkill model makes the following assumptions:

   1. Each player has a latent skill value that represents their expected contribution to a team.
       A player's performance in a game is a noisy sample of their skill.

   2. The performance of a team is the weighted sum of the performances of its players, where
       the weight is the fraction of time the player spent on the team.

   3. If a team's performance is greater than the other team by a certain margin, the team wins.
       Otherwise, the game is a draw. When learning skills from data, only the team win/loss
       information is used (not scores).

   4. Player skills evolve over time according to a random walk. An increase or decrease in skill
       is assumed equally likely.

   5. A player's skill in a game mode is assumed independent of their skill in all other modes.

The TrueSkill2 model modifies the classic model in the following ways:

   1. A player's latent skill is inferred from their individual statistics such as kill and death
       counts, in addition to team win/loss.

   2. When a player quits or drops out in the middle of a game, it is treated as a surrender and
       their skill is updated as if they lost a game (regardless of actual outcome).

   3. A player's skill in a game mode is assumed statistically correlated with their skill in other
       modes, so that when a player starts a new mode, their skill rating from other modes is
       borrowed.

   4. The random walk of player skill is assumed biased toward increasing skill, with larger bias
       during the first matches a player plays in a game mode.

   5. When a player is part of a squad, their performance is assumed to be better than normal.

                                                            3
2 Classic TrueSkill

This section describes the classic TrueSkill model in detail, and sets the notation used in the
rest of the paper. In the classic TrueSkill model, the data is assumed to consists of a sequence
of match results, each of which lists the players involved, their team assignments, the start time
and length of the match, how long each player played, and the final score of each team. The
team scores are only used to determine an ordering of best to worst, including ties.

    To interpret this data, TrueSkill assumes a probabilistic generative model of match results.
This means that, instead of experimenting with different formulas for updating a player's skill
rating and hoping to stumble upon the right one, we construct an intuitive random process for
generating skills and match results. This model can be checked against data and refined based
on any discrepancies we encounter. When we are happy with the fit to data, we apply Bayesian
inference to obtain an optimal algorithm for updating skill ratings.

    The generation process is illustrated below, where boxes denote variables that are observed
in the data:

Past   Skill        Skill                 Skill
Skill

       Performance  Performance           Performance

                        Team
                    Performance

                                                       Winner

                    Other team
                    Performance

    The first step of the generation process is generating the player skills. Each player i is
assumed to have a real-valued skill, denoted skillti, at time t. The initial skill of a player is
drawn from a Gaussian distribution with mean m0 and variance v0. This sampling process is

denoted

                    skillti0  N (m0, v0)                       (1)

where t0 is the time of the player's first match and (m0, v0) are tunable parameters. After each
match, the player's skill changes by a random amount, also drawn from a Gaussian:

       skillit+L  N (skillit, 2) after a match of length L     (2)

                    4
(Note that we are talking about the player's actual skill level, not their skill rating assigned by
the system.) In the original paper [Herbrich et al., 2007], this was the only way that a player's
skill could change. A later paper [Dangauthier et al., 2008] made the alternative assumption
(also made by Glickman [1999]) that a player's skill changed with the passage of time, rather
than from playing matches:

skillit  N (skillit,  2(t - t)) where t > t  (3)

Both of these assumptions make sense, since a player gains experience from each match they
play, and their sharpness decreases over time without play. Therefore we include both types of
change in the "classic" model.

    The next step of the generation process is generating the match results from the player
skills. TrueSkill assumes that each player has a real-valued performance in each match, drawn
according to:

perf        t    N  (skillti,  2)            (4)
            i

where  is a tunable parameter that reflects the amount of randomness in the game. In the
following, we drop the dependence of perfi on t since we are always referring to a specific match.
In a two-player game without draws, the winner is the player with the largest performance. If
draws are possible, then the model includes a parameter > 0, and declares a match to be
drawn if the difference between performances is less than or equal to :

 perf1 - perf2 >         player 1 wins
|perf1 - perf2|               draw
perf1 - perf2 < -
                         player 2 wins

    In a game with teams, the performance of each team is defined to be the weighted sum of
the player performances, where the weights are the fraction of the match time that they played
on the team:

perfteam =         perf  i  timePlayedi      (5)
                                  L
            iteam

The outcome between two teams is decided in the same way as above. If a game has more than
two teams and no possibility of draws, then we sort the teams by their performances to get their
ordering.

    If a game has more than two teams and allows draws, then things get more complicated. The
original paper [Herbrich et al., 2007] never gave a generative model for this situation, instead it
only provided a factor graph. Here we give a generative model that captures the spirit of the
factor graph. The idea is that if the performance difference between two teams is within , then
the teams must have the same rank. Teams that are not forced to have the same rank according
to this rule have different ranks. Given team performances perf1, perf2, ..., perfn in descending
order, the following pseudo-code produces the rank of each team:

                   5
   1. Initialize rank  1. Team 1 has rank 1.

   2. For team = 2, ..., n:

        (a) If perfteam < perfteam-1 - , then rank  rank + 1.

        (b) Assign rank to team.

In practice, this model for draws gives similar skill ratings as the approach in Herbrich et al.
[2007]. Since the approach in Herbrich et al. [2007] is simpler to implement, we used their
approach.

    There is a scale ambiguity in this model, in the sense that if we scale all skill variables by
2, along with  and , then the distribution over team orderings is the same. We resolve this
ambiguity by fixing  = 1. This means that a skill gap of 1 always corresponds to the same win
rate. The amount of luck in a game is reflected in the size of v0, where smaller v0 implies more
luck is involved.

    In a two-player game, there is also a shift ambiguity in the model, in the sense that if we
add 2 to all skills, then the distribution over outcomes is the same. Thus m0 is irrelevant in
such games. However, in a team game where teams may have different sizes, for example due
to players dropping out, m0 is relevant since it represents the value of having a teammate.

    Note that this model does not generate the entire match result. It generates the ordering of
teams given the players in the match, their team assignments, the length of the match, and the
length of time each player played. It does not generate the set of the players that will be in a
match, the team assignments, the time of the match, the length of the match, or the length of
time each player played. However, most of these things are correlated with skill. For example,
a person who plays in the middle of the day is more likely to be a dedicated player with higher
skill. Due to skill-based matchmaking, a player on the opposite team as a skilled player is more
likely to be skilled themselves. From a purely statistical perspective, including these correlations
in the model would give better skill estimates. But TrueSkill does not do this, because it would
create undesirable incentives for players who want to increase their skill rating. The incentive
should be to play the game well, not to queue up at particular times of day or with particular
teammates.

    The fact that TrueSkill does not model the length of time a player played is questionable. If
a player tends to quit in the middle of a match, then this should arguably be reflected in their
skill rating. On the other hand, if a player joins a match in progress, this shorter play time
should not be reflected in their skill rating. TrueSkill treats both cases the same way. If a player
quits early in the match, then timePlayedi will be small, so the player will have a negligible
change to their skill rating, which may even be positive if their team happens to win.

    One way to penalize quitters is to artificially set timePlayedi to the full length of the game.
This penalizes the quitter, but also harshly penalizes players on the same team. This becomes
worse when a new player joins to replace the quitter. Since the quitter is considered to have
played for the full time, this team is considered to have more players than normal, and therefore
expected to win. If the team doesn't win, all remaining players, including the late joiner, get

                                                            6
large reductions in skill rating. Therefore we don't recommend this approach for team games.
TrueSkill2 provides a better way to penalize quitters, as discussed in section 9.

3 Computing skill ratings

Given a probabilistic generative model for match results, skill ratings are computed by Bayesian
inference. Formally, the model defines a joint distribution over player skills and match results,
conditional on the unmodeled aspects of each match (which we will abbreviate as match condi-
tions). The distribution over player skills comes from Bayes' rule:

p(skills|results, conditions) =  p(results|skills, conditions)p(skills)                   (6)

                                    p(results|conditions)

In practice, we don't compute the entire joint distribution over skills, but only the marginal dis-
tribution of skillti, the skill of player i at time t, for all i and t. This distribution is approximated
by a Gaussian, and the mean of that Gaussian is taken as the player's skill rating.

    There are a variety of algorithms available for performing Bayesian inference, but this model
is particularly suited to Expectation Propagation [Minka, 2001]. Herbrich et al. [2007] and
Dangauthier et al. [2008] used the Expectation Propagation algorithm and gave a factor graph
with message equations. In this work, we used the Infer.NET framework [Minka et al., 2014b]
to generate code for Expectation Propagation automatically, based on our model description.
This generated code performs message-passing on a factor graph, as described in Herbrich et al.
[2007], and produces the same results as in that paper. Infer.NET generated both the online
and batch versions of the inference algorithm. In fact, TrueSkill Through Time is one of the
examples in the Infer.NET documentation [Minka et al., 2014a].

    To generate the online TrueSkill updates, we defined a model in Infer.NET consisting of a
single match. The prior distributions on the player skills, the match conditions, model parame-
ters, and the team ranks were marked as observed variables, and the player skills were marked as
variables to infer. Infer.NET then generated code where the observed variables were the input,
and the inferred skill distributions were the output. This code is used to compute skill ratings
in the following way:

1. Initialize all player skill distributions to a Gaussian with mean m0 and variance v0.
2. For each match result in order of start time:

(a) Look up the current skill distribution for each player in the match.

(b) Increase the variance of each skill distribution according to the amount of time elapsed
     since the player's last match and equation (3), to represent a possible change in skill
     due to their absence from the game.

(c) Invoke the inference code on the match result and skill distributions, to get a new set
     of skill distributions. These represent each player's skill during the match.

                                 7
(d) Increase the variance of each skill distribution according to (2), to represent a possible
     change in skill as a result of playing the match.

(e) Store the new skill distribution for each player in the match.

    The online TrueSkill updates are useful as a fast, real-time approximation to the posterior
distribution over skills. But the most accurate skill ratings come from processing many matches
together as a batch. To see why, consider 5 matches between 6 players, played in this order:

1. A beats B

2. C beats D

3. E beats F

4. B beats C

5. D beats E

All players start with the same skill distribution. After the first 3 matches, players (A,C,E)
have all won 1 match against equivalent opponents, so the online updates will give them the
same skill distribution. Similarly, players (B,D,F) get the same skill distribution. In the last
two matches, B and D started with the same skill distribution, and beat opponents with the
same skill distribution, so they end up with the same final skill distribution. Similarly, C and
E end up with the same skill distribution. But this is clearly wrong. If we consider all matches
together, the players should be ordered A > B > C > D > E > F .

    To generate the batch TrueSkill algorithm, we defined a model in Infer.NET that included
the entire generation process described in section 2. Each player had a skill variable skillit for
every match they played. This is many more variables than Dangauthier et al. [2008], who used
one skill variable for each year of play. The generated code takes as input a list of match results
and outputs a Gaussian distribution for each skillti variable. The handling of model parameters
is discussed in section 4.

    The difference between online and batch inference is illustrated on real data below.

                   Online                                                                                        Batch

4.5                                                                                           4.5

4Skill rating                                                                                 4
                                                                                Skill rating
3.5                                                                                           3.5

3                                                                                             3

2.5    20     40  60       80 100 120                                                         2.5    20  40  60         80 100 120
    0                                                                                             0

              Number of matches                                                                          Number of matches

    The data was 700k Halo 5 Slayer matches, and skill ratings were computed for all players.
Out of this large set of players, the figures show the skill ratings of the same six players, versus

                                       8
the number of matches each one played. The skill ratings from batch immediately stand out as
being smoother, but more importantly they give a different final ordering of players, with red
below green and black far below blue.

4 Parameter estimation

The classic TrueSkill model has tunable parameters (m0, v0, , , , ) for each game mode. To
make the skill rating system easy to use by a game studio, these should be learned from data.
Previous work tuned these parameters by sweeping over a grid, which is only practical for a
small number of parameters on a small dataset. Since our goal is to extend the model with more
parameters, and run on large datasets, we needed a different solution. Our approach is to treat
the model parameters as random variables in the model, giving them prior distributions, and
inferring them jointly with the skills. In practice, we gave the parameters broad priors, so they
were mainly determined by the data.

    Our initial approach was to infer the parameters with Expectation Propagation. Unfortu-
nately, most parameters are involved in generating every match result, which means that, in the
factor graph, a given parameter will be connected to millions of factors. This leads to a high
memory requirement as a large number of messages need to be stored. In addition, the posterior
distribution for some parameters is highly non-Gaussian, leading to poor approximations and
sometimes non-convergence of the algorithm.

    Our final approach exploits the fact that each parameter connects to a million factors. In such
a model, the parameter will tend to have a sharp posterior distribution. Therefore we chose
to drop the uncertainty in the parameter posteriors, and approximate them as point masses
during each iteration. This not only saves memory on messages, but also saves computation.
At the end of each iteration, we update each parameter using Rprop [Riedmiller and Braun,
1993], where the gradient is computed by accumulating the Expectation Propagation messages
into that parameter. The incoming messages are computed once and discarded. This procedure
reaches reasonable parameter estimates in about 100 iterations, i.e. 100 forward and backward
sweeps through the data. Note that this approximation breaks down for game modes with less
than 1000 matches. For such modes, we used the parameters estimated from the most similar
popular mode.

    For the Halo 5 data, typical parameter values are:

    · m0 = 3 (teammates are very important)

    · v0 = 1.6 (skills of new players only vary by 1 from the mean)

    ·  = 10-3 (skills change slowly)

    ·  = 10-8 per minute, so that / = 105 minutes of non-play are equivalent to one match

    ·  = 1 (by design)

    · = 10-3 (draws are rare)

                                                            9
5 Metric-driven modelling

This section describes the approach that was used to develop the TrueSkill2 model. The mo-
tivation behind it is that a skill rating system should use the simplest model that meets the
needs of a game studio, and we shouldn't have to spend large amounts of time searching for
that model. The basic principle is that any change to the model must be motivated by a metric
that demonstrates a gap between the model and reality. The metric must be meaningful to the
application, and specific enough that it is clear where the model needs to be changed in order to
improve the metric. We call this approach "metric-driven modelling," taking inspiration from
test-driven development of computer software. The metrics encode a deep understanding of the
application, while modelling is in principle a mechanical search for ways to improve the metrics.

    A metric is a function averaged over a subset of test data. It can refer to the data, inferences
from the model, or the difference between an inference and the data. Data subsets are defined
using features. The metric designer's job is to determine the relevant subsets and comparisons.
In principle, this does not require knowledge of the model. Metrics should be in data space, or
more generally the external interface of the model, not in the parameter space.

    For a generative model of match results, the key metric is how well it predicts the final order-
ing of teams. We call this the predictive accuracy. For matches with two teams, there are only 3
possible orderings. With more teams, the number of possible orderings grows exponentially. To
get a meaningful and easily computable metric, we only ask the model to predict the identity
of the winning team, or predict "draw" when there is a tie for first place. Thus the number of
options is the number of teams plus 1.

    Accuracy is useful for comparing models, but it doesn't tell you why errors were made. Is
the model favoring certain kinds of teams or players? Does it penalize quitters too harshly, or
not enough? Does it overestimate the skill of new players, or underestimate them? To answer
these questions, we look at how often the model thinks a particular kind of team or player would
win, compared to how often they actually win.

    The dataset used to develop TrueSkill2 was the set of all matches played in Halo 5 since its
release in 2015, provided to us by 343 Industries. Halo 5 has a variety of game modes, which
span various numbers of teams and team sizes. This dataset contains millions of match results
and millions of unique players. For the results shown in this paper, the training set consisted
of 23 million games played just after release. The test set consisted of the next 3 million games
played after the end of the training period. Because of the large size of this dataset, there is no
need to report error bars in our summary statistics since they are tiny.

    All metrics, including predictive accuracy, were measured in the following way. For each
model, the parameters were tuned on the training set. Then the model was asked to predict
the outcomes in the test set. The player skills were reset between the train and test phase.
Resetting the player skills is not essential but made the implementation simpler.

    The matches in the test set were sorted by start time and processed once in order. As each
match was processed, we asked the model to predict the winning team and give a probability
for this event. When making this prediction, only the team composition and squad membership
are used--the length of the game, time each player played, completion status, and kill/death

                                                            10
counts are not used. Then we updated the skills using the online updater with all of the
information available at the end of the match. The percentage of correct predictions is the
predictive accuracy, and the percentage of matches where a particular kind of team or player
was predicted to win is its expected win rate.

    Many of our metrics involve the expected win rate of a subpopulation of players. This is
computed by recording the prediction for all matches, visiting each player in each match, and
testing if the player meets the criteria. If so, the prediction for that player's team is added to
the tally. The final metric is an average of the predictions for all players that met the criteria.
Thus the subpopulation that we define only changes the subset of predictions that go into the
average. It does not change how we make predictions or update skills. Skills are always updated
using all matches.

    After tuning model parameters on the training data, classic TrueSkill achieved a predictive
accuracy of 52% on the test set. TrueSkill2 achieved a predictive accuracy of 68% on the test
set. The next sections explain how this was accomplished. The figure below illustrates the
new generative model in TrueSkill2, where boxes denote variables that are observed in the data
(compare to section 2).

   Past            Skill                Skill             Skill
    Skill                                            Performance
                                Squad?
Experience

                   Performance          Performance

 Kill       Death  Quit?                    Team
Count       Count                       Performance

                                        Other team                Winner
                                        Performance

6 Squad offset

Many online multiplayer games give friends the option of queuing up together. We call such a
grouping a squad. The matchmaker is expected to find a fair match where the entire squad is on
one team. This is typically done by assuming that the skill rating of a squad is the sum of skill
ratings of its players. We can test this assumption by measuring an appropriate metric. The
metric we chose partitions players according to whether they queued up in a squad versus solo,
and measures their actual win rate compared to their predicted win rate under the assumption.
This was done regardless of game mode. The results on the test set are collected below:

                                                            11
Player Squad Size       Win Rate (%)  Expected by TrueSkill
                     1         47                 47
                     2         50                 50
                     3         50                 50
                     4         57                 52
                     5         53                 49
                     6         56                 48
                     7         62                 49
                     8         68                 49
                     9         70                 54
                               89                 67
                 10

    We see that the assumption about squads is false. The skill rating of a squad should be
larger than the sum of its players, and the effect grows with the size of the squad. This is a
well-known phenomenon in online gaming. In fact, some playlists in Halo 5 and Gears of War
4 prohibit large squads in an attempt to provide fairer matches, even though this lowers the
enjoyment of people who like to play with their friends. Other games address this by forcing
squads to match with other squads. This has the problem of shrinking the matchmaking pool.

    Instead of prohibiting squads or constraining matchmaking, TrueSkill2 changes the assump-
tion about the skill rating of squads. This new assumption should be used during matchmaking
as well as after a match, when updating skill ratings. There are a variety of different models that
one could imagine, but, in keeping with metric-driven modelling, we chose the simplest model
that fixes the metrics in the above table. This model simply adds an offset to the skill rating
of a player, depending on the size of their squad, when generating the player's performance.
Therefore equation (4) is replaced by:

perf  t    N (skillti   +  squadOffset(size  of  squad),  2)  (7)
      i

where squadOffset is an array of tunable parameters, one for each possible squad size, for each
game mode. We fix squadOffset(1) = 0.

    To incorporate this change, we updated the model description for Infer.NET, generated the
new inference code automatically, and ran batch inference on the training set to infer the model
parameters. On the same test set as before, we get the following metric values:

Player Squad Size       Win Rate (%)  Expected by TrueSkill2
                     1         47                  46
                     2         50                  51
                     3         50                  50
                     4         57                  57
                     5         53                  53
                     6         55                  54
                     7         62                  59
                     8         68                  61
                     9         70                  66
                               89                  87
                 10

                           12
    We cannot change the matchmaking in historical data, so the actual win rates are unchanged.
But the model now predicts close to the correct win rates, implying that its skill ratings for
squads are more accurate.

7 Experience effects

A key priority of any game studio is ensuring that new players have an enjoyable first time with
the game. Part of this is putting new players into fair matches. This can only happen if the skill
ratings assigned to new players are accurate. We measure this by partitioning players according
to the number of matches that they have previously played in any game mode (we call this their
experience), and comparing their actual win rate to that expected under the TrueSkill model.

Player Experience       Win Rate (%)  Expected by TrueSkill
                     0         45                 49
                     1         46                 49
                     2         45                 48
                     3         45                 48
                     4         45                 48
                     5         46                 48
                     6         46                 48
                     7         46                 48
                     8         46                 48
                     9         47                 48
                               49                 48
                  10

    We see that TrueSkill is not predicting the correct win rate for new players. These results
suggest that players tend to increase in skill as they play the game, with the largest increases
happening at the beginning. It makes sense intuitively that skill is correlated with experience.
However, the classic TrueSkill model assumes that player skill changes according to a random
walk, where upward and downward changes are equally likely. This suggests a simple change to
the model, to make the random walk biased. Let experienceti be the number of matches played
in the current game mode before time t. In practice, we cap this at 200 to limit the number of
parameters. Instead of equation (2), we use

skillit+L  N (skillti + experienceOffset(min(experienceit, 200)), 2)  (8)

where experienceOffset is an array of 200 tunable parameters per game mode.
    Operationally, this means that each player receives a small increment to their skill rating

after playing a match, regardless of the outcome. These increments are small relative to the
difference between winning and losing a match, so skill rating will still go down if a player loses
repeatedly. The table below shows the effect of adding these increments for players in the test
set:

                        13
Player Experience       Win Rate (%)  Expected by TrueSkill2
                     0         45                  43
                     1         46                  44
                     2         45                  44
                     3         45                  44
                     4         45                  45
                     5         46                  45
                     6         46                  46
                     7         46                  46
                     8         46                  46
                     9         47                  47
                               49                  49
                  10

    TrueSkill2 does a much better job of tracking win rates. However, it is consistently under-
estimating the win rate. This is because many of the players considered "new" in our test set
are not actually new players.

8 Individual statistics

In the Halo 5 data, each match result lists statistics for each player, such as the number of kills
they scored and the number of times they were killed (deaths). Since these numbers are likely
to be correlated with skill, it is worth trying to include this data in the model.

    As with any model change, the first step is to define metrics that demonstrate the usefulness
of this data for estimating skill ratings. One approach is to partition players according to the
number of kills they score per minute of play (their kill rate), and look for discrepancies between
their actual and predicted win rate. In doing so, it is important to exclude the number of kills
in the match whose outcome is being predicted, because there is an obvious correlation between
scoring many kills in a match and winning that match. The table below partitions players in
the test set according to their kill rate in their previous match. There are significant differences
between their actual and expected win rate under the classic TrueSkill model.

Player Previous Kill Rate        Win Rate (%)  Expected by TrueSkill
                    (0.0 - 0.4)         43                 48
                    (0.4 - 0.8)         46                 48
                    (0.8 - 1.2)         49                 48
                    (1.2 - 1.6)         50                 48
                    (1.6 - 2.0)         51                 48
                    (2.0 - 2.4)         52                 48
                    (2.4 - 2.8)         53                 49
                    (2.8 - 3.2)         54                 49
                    (3.2 - 3.6)         56                 50
                    (3.6 - 4.0)         59                 50

                                 14
    The remaining task is to choose an appropriate probabilistic generative model for a player's
kill and death counts. A common model for sports scores is a Poisson distribution whose
mean depends on a team's scoring ability minus their opponent's defensive ability [Baio and
Blangiardo, 2010, Guo et al., 2012, Ruiz and Perez-Cruz, 2015]. This assumes that scoring
events occur with a constant rate and independently of the time since the last event. This
in turn implies that scores should scale with the length of the match, yet none of the cited
papers include this effect in their model. To test this theory, we partitioned matches by length,
computed the average number of kills and deaths per player, and the variance around this
average. To eliminate variations due to skill, we only considered matches where all players
had a near-average skill rating. To eliminate variations due to game mode, we only considered
matches in the Warzone mode. Here are the results:

70

       Kill Average

60     Kill Variance

       Death Average

                 Death Variance
50

40

30

20

10

0

    0  5  10                     15  20  25

          Match length (minutes)

    The plot shows that both the mean and variance of the counts scale linearly with match
length, as would be expected by the independence assumption. However, the variance does not
equal the mean, as required by a Poisson distribution. Therefore we chose to use a Truncated
Gaussian distribution for the counts.

    Another key aspect of these papers is that they use latent variables whose sole purpose is to
model the scoring ability of a team. In TrueSkill2, the goal is to correlate kill/death counts with
the existing player skill variable. In game modes where the objective to score the most kills,
then we expect this correlation to be high. In game modes where the objective is to capture
territory or simply stay alive as long as possible, we expect this correlation to be low. Even in
modes where the objective is to score kills, there may be teamwork effects where players can
help their team win without scoring kills themselves. We ultimately want player skill to reflect
a player's ability to win, not their ability to score kills.

    Our solution to this problem is to predict individual statistics from the performance variables
perfi. As explained in section 2, the performance variables determine the winner of the match.
Therefore the model cannot choose skill ratings that only predict individual statistics. They must

                      15
predict the match winner first, and secondarily predict the individual statistics. We expect that
the most benefit from including individual statistics will come in team games. In such games,
the players on a team can have different performance values, as long as their total performance
is consistent with the match result. TrueSkill2 uses this flexibility to give more credit for a win
to players with the best individual scores, something that classic TrueSkill cannot do.

    To determine how the individual statistics depend on performance, we partitioned players
by skill, the average skill of their teammates, and the average skill of their opponents. We found
that the statistics were linear in all three, with teammates having a very small effect. Therefore
to keep the model simple, we dropped the dependence on teammates. Putting all of the above
together gives the following model for a count of type c (c  {kill, death}):

                 countic  max(0, N ((wpcperfi + wocperfoi )timePlayedi, vctimePlayedi))                          (9)

where (wpc, woc, vc) are tunable parameters for each count type in each game mode. These pa-

rameters determine the correlation between individual statistics and skill rating. For two teams

of  equal  size  where  everyone  played   for  the  full   time,    perf  o  is  the  average  performance  of  the
                                                                           i

opposing team. Typically, wp and wo have different signs. For kill count, wp > 0 and wo < 0.

For death count, wp < 0 and wo > 0.

    If the player's team is larger than the opposing team, then we need a different formula

for perfio, to account for the divided attention of each opposing player. For each player i, let

opposingi be the total number of opposing players, weighted by their play time (L is the length

of the match):

                        opposingi =                                  timePlayedj                                 (10)
                                                                           L
                                                j | team(j)=team(i)

We assume that each player's attention is divided by this number. Therefore

                        perf  o   =                         timePlayedj          perf j                          (11)
                              i                                   L           opposingj

                                     j  |  team(j)=team(i)

This formula works for any number of teams of any sizes. Thus there are three key differences
between TrueSkill2's model of individual statistics and previous work on sports scores:

    1. TrueSkill2 incorporates the effect of match length.

    2. TrueSkill2 models the correlation between individual statistics and a player's ability to
       win.

   3. TrueSkill2 incorporates the effect of having many teams of different sizes.

The linear model here could be replaced with a more flexible model, if the data warranted
it. However, it is important that the model is constrained to be monotonic. A monotonic
relationship incentivizes players to maximize their kill count and minimize their death count.
A non-monotonic relationship would give players misaligned incentives, such as stopping when
they reach a certain number of kills.

    The table below shows the effect of these model changes on the test set:

                                                     16
Player Previous Kill Rate        Win Rate (%)            Expected by TrueSkill2
                    (0.0 - 0.4)         43                            41
                    (0.4 - 0.8)         46                            45
                    (0.8 - 1.2)         49                            48
                    (1.2 - 1.6)         50                            50
                    (1.6 - 2.0)         51                            51
                    (2.0 - 2.4)         52                            52
                    (2.4 - 2.8)         53                            53
                    (2.8 - 3.2)         54                            54
                    (3.2 - 3.6)         56                            56
                    (3.6 - 4.0)         59                            59

    There is a much better agreement between actual and expected win rate, therefore the skills
estimated from individual statistics are more accurate.

9 Quit penalty

As discussed in section 2, classic TrueSkill does not penalize players who quit. TrueSkill2
solves this problem by including a player's completion status ("completed" versus "quit") in the
generative model.

    The first step, as always, is to define metrics that measure the relationship between comple-
tion status and skill. In section 8, we looked at a player's behavior in the previous match. The
same approach works here. Specifically, we can partition players according to their completion
status in the previous match and look for discrepancies between their actual and predicted win
rate.

Player Previous Outcome          Win Rate (%)            Expected by TrueSkill
            Win Completed               51                           50
                    Win Quit            45                           49
            Loss Completed              47                           46
                    Loss Quit           44                           47
           Draw Completed               49                           48
                   Draw Quit            46                           47

    This table shows that quitters tend to have lower skill (for the same match outcome), but
their TrueSkill rating does not reflect this.

    Digging deeper into the data, we found that players who quit have worse individual statistics
than players who complete, even for the same amount of time played. This suggests that players
quit more when their performance is low. But low relative to what? According to section 8,
individual statistics are determined by the player's performance minus the opposing team's
performance. This suggests the following probabilistic model for whether a player is under-
performing:

                underi    (N     (perf i  -  perf  o  -  mq ,  vq )  <  0)       (12)
                                                   i

                                          17
where perfo is defined the same way as in section 8, and (mq, vq) are tunable parameters (per
game mode) that allow for variation in the degree that a player underperforms. We force mq  0
during parameter estimation. Of course, a player may not quit when they underperform, and

players may quit for other reasons. We model these effects by random Boolean variables:

quiti = unrelatedi OR (relatedi AND underi)                          (13)

where unrelatedi is true with probability pu and relatedi is true with probability pr, both tunable
parameters in each game mode.

    The net effect of this model is that it will infer lower performance values for players who
quit compared to players who do not quit. A surprising side effect is that, in order to penalize
players that quit, the model must reward players that complete. It is counter-intuitive for a
player's skill rating to increase simply for completing a match, especially if they played for zero
seconds. But in order to penalize players that quit with zero seconds played, the model must
reward players that complete with zero seconds played. Note that this model also adds a small
amount of additional computation to process each match, even if no player ever quits.

    A property that we would like is that, if no player quits, then the computational cost and final
results should be identical to classic TrueSkill. This means we cannot use a model that generates
completion status. Instead, we treat a quit as an additional observation that only appears when
a player quits. We interpret a quit as the outcome of a mini-game between the player and
(a rescaled version of) the enemy team. Unfortunately, since this model is unnormalized, we
cannot easily learn its parameters. Our solution is to learn parameters using the normalized
model, then switch to the unnormalized model for online updating, with the same parameters.
In experiments, this switch actually gives a slight improvement in predictive accuracy, compared
to using the normalized model throughout.

    The table below shows the effect of these model changes, on the same test data as above:

Player Previous Outcome        Win Rate (%)  Expected by TrueSkill2
            Win Completed             51                  52
                    Win Quit          45                  43
            Loss Completed            47                  46
                    Loss Quit         44                  42
           Draw Completed             49                  48
                   Draw Quit          46                  43

    We see that TrueSkill2 lowers a player's skill rating after a quit, but a bit more than it
should.

10 Features that did not need to be added

The model changes so far have all had orthogonal metrics. That is, the metrics that motivated
each change could not be fixed by the other changes. For example, the metrics that motivated

                               18
squad offsets are not fixed by modeling experience or individual statistics. But in other cases,
metrics that seem to indicate a model change are automatically fixed by earlier changes.

    For example, when we partition players according to the length of time since their last match
("lapse"), we get the following table:

Lapse in days     Win Rate (%)  Expected by TrueSkill
         (0 - 1)         49                 48
         (1 - 2)         46                 47
         (2 - 3)         46                 48
         (3 - 4)         45                 48
         (4 - 5)         45                 48
         (5 - 6)         45                 48
         (6 - 7)         44                 48
         (7 - 8)         43                 48
         (8 - 9)         43                 48
             9           45                 48

    Win rate decreases with lapse, and classic TrueSkill does not capture this. This seems to
indicate that player lapse should be added to the model. However, once the experience effect
was added in TrueSkill2, the correct trend with lapse emerged automatically:

Lapse in days     Win Rate (%)  Expected by TrueSkill2
         (0 - 1)         49                  48
         (1 - 2)         46                  46
         (2 - 3)         46                  45
         (3 - 4)         45                  44
         (4 - 5)         45                  44
         (5 - 6)         45                  43
         (6 - 7)         44                  43
         (7 - 8)         43                  42
         (8 - 9)         43                  42
             9           45                  42

    A related occurrence was features that seemed like they should be useful to add to the
model, but turned out to be unnecessary. These were caught early by looking at the right
metrics. For example, player score seems like it should be relevant since it incorporates mode-
specific objectives. The raw score reported by the game includes kills, so we subtracted these off
to get a number we call "Extra score". As in section 8, we partitioned players by their "Extra
score" in the previous match, and compared their actual and expected win rate. With kills and
deaths already included in the model, these numbers matched. So player score did not need to
be added.

                  19
11 Mode correlation

Most online multiplayer games have multiple game modes, which change the rules and/or ob-
jectives of the game. A player typically queues up to play a particular mode, and expects the
matchmaker to construct a fair match for that mode. Thus the matchmaker needs to know a
player's skill rating in a particular mode. In some games, such as Halo 5, a mode is chosen after
matchmaking. Even in these cases, it can be useful to have a skill rating per mode since it leads
to faster convergence and more accurate skill ratings overall. For example, suppose player A
has high skill in mode 1 and low skill in mode 2. When playing against a mid level opponent,
we expect A to win in mode 1 and lose in mode 2. So if A wins in mode 1, then the opponent's
skill rating should decrease slightly, if at all. But if A wins in mode 2, then the opponent's skill
rating should decrease significantly. To construct a single skill rating for matchmaking, take
a weighted average of the player's rating in each mode, where the weight is the probability of
playing that mode.

    The traditional approach to handling multiple gameplay modes in TrueSkill is to have a
separate skill distribution for each mode. This is equivalent to assuming that a person's skill in
one mode is independent of their skill in another mode. We can easily test this assumption by
comparing the skill ratings computed by TrueSkill for different gameplay modes. For two of the
modes in the Halo 5 data, we plot the skill ratings of players with many games played in both
modes:

                          5.5

                          5

Skill in Weekend Doubles  4.5

                          4

                          3.5

                          3

                          2.5

                          2

                          1.5

                          1

                               2  3  4      5           6  7

                                     Skill in Breakout

    The skill ratings are correlated, with correlation coefficient = 0.6. Repeating this experiment
for all pairs of gameplay modes gives similar results. A player's skill in any gameplay mode is
positively correlated with their skill in all other modes. This makes sense since many of the
game mechanics, such as the controls, are the same between modes.

    This suggests that we can improve skill estimation by borrowing information from other
gameplay modes. Since the prior distribution (1) on a player's skill is Gaussian, a natural way
to correlate skills is to use a multivariate Gaussian distribution with a full covariance matrix

                                        20
between modes. However, estimating the correlation between all pairs of modes requires a
significant amount of training data. Typically, a game has a fewer popular modes, and a long
tail of short-lived or niche modes. Therefore, in order to keep training data requirements low,
we opted for a simpler approach where skills are correlated along a single dimension, which we
call the player's base skill. The base skill evolves over time, and the base skill for player i at
time t is denoted baseit. The skill of player i in mode d at time t is denoted skillitd and is equal
to the base skill plus an offset.

    The generative process for skills is changed to the following. The base skill is drawn from a
Gaussian prior distribution:

                 baseit0  N (0, vb)                                         (14)

where t0 is the time of the first game, and vb is a tunable parameter. The base skill changes
with each match played, as well as between matches:

baseit+L  N (baseit, b2ase) after a match of length L                       (15)

baseti  N (baseti, b2ase(t - t)) between matches                            (16)

The offset for a mode is drawn from a Gaussian prior distribution:

offsetitd0  N (md, vd)                                                      (17)

where (md, vd) are tunable parameters. The offset changes with each match played, as well as
between matches:

offsettid+L  N (offsettid + experienceOffset(min(experienceitd, 200)), d2)  (18)

after a match of length L

offsetitd  N (offsetitd, d2(t - t))                                         (19)

between matches

Finally, skill is the weighted sum of base and offset:

skilltid = wdbaseti + offsetitd                                             (20)

where wd is a tunable parameter that governs the correlation between modes. If wd is zero,
mode d has no correlation with any other mode. To avoid bad local optima, we force wd  0
during parameter estimation.

    The online updating algorithm from section 3 changes in the following way. Instead of
maintaining a skill distribution per game mode, we maintain one base skill distribution plus an
offset distribution per game mode. When processing a match result, we first increase the variance
of the base distribution and offset distribution for the game mode. Since these distributions are
all Gaussian, the distribution over skill defined by (20) is also Gaussian. This skill distribution
is updated by the per-match model, which can be interpreted as a message from the match

                                     21
result to the skill variable. This message propagates to the base and offset variables in the usual
manner of Expectation Propagation, to determine their posterior distributions. In practice,
all we have to do is add (20) to the model description for Infer.NET and re-generate the skill
updating code, which will output the posterior distribution for base and offset directly. During
matchmaking, when we want a player's skill rating in a particular mode, we look up the base
skill distribution and offset skill distribution (if it exists), then apply (20).

    The net effect is that, when a player's skill is updated in one mode, it will also be updated
in other modes. However, the mathematics of the update ensures that these changes will be
negligible once the player has played a sufficient number of matches in the other mode. A player's
skill rating in a mode where many matches have already been played will not be affected by
playing other modes.

    In some games, such as League of Legends and Dota 2, players can play as different characters
with different abilities. Using the same mechanism as above, a player can be given a different skill
rating with each character, and these can be correlated. Even if players choose their character
after matchmaking, maintaining separate skill ratings increases the convergence rate and overall
accuracy of the skill rating system, for the same reason as given earlier for game modes. If you
beat someone who is playing a character for the first time, you should not get the same rating
change as beating their best character. To construct a single skill rating for matchmaking, a
simple approach is to take a weighted average of the player's skill rating with each character,
where the weight is their probability of choosing that character.

12 Gears of War 4

TrueSkill2 has been used successfully as the skill rating system in Gears of War 4 since its launch
in 2016. Skills are updated in real-time using the online updates. Before each new "season" of
ranked play, all skills and model parameters are recomputed using batch inference (TrueSkill
Through Time) on the data from all previous seasons.

    Unlike Halo 5, Gears of War 4 has AI-controlled bots in social and co-op game modes. Each
bot has a difficulty level. We include bots into the skill rating system by treating each difficulty
level as a unique player. However, while human skills are assumed to change over time, a bot's
skill is assumed constant over time. This means that the updates (8) and (3) are not applied to
bot skills. (A bot's skill rating may change as we learn about the bot, but eventually this will
converge.) Thus bots provide a fixed baseline against which all human skills can be measured.
The inferred skill ratings for the bots can also provide feedback to the game designers about the
true difficulty level of each bot.

13 Summary

This paper has presented TrueSkill2, a collection of model changes to TrueSkill as well as a
new system for estimating model parameters. TrueSkill2 gives significantly more accurate skill
ratings than TrueSkill, measured along a variety of axes important to a game studio.

                                                            22
Acknowledgements

Thanks to Alan Lawrence for help implementing the evaluation framework, and Vijay Sharma for
help implementing the experimentation infrastructure. Thanks to The Coalition for providing
development support and testing, and Clayton Vaught for his help with the Gears of War
matchmaking designs. Thanks to 343 Industries for providing the data, and Joshua Menke and
Brian Richards for helpful discussions.

References

Gianluca Baio and Marta A. Blangiardo. Bayesian hierarchical model for the prediction of
  football results. Journal of Applied Statistics, 37(2):253­264, 2010. URL http://www.
  statistica.it/gianluca/Research/BaioBlangiardo.pdf.

Shuo Chen and Thorsten Joachims. Modeling intransitivity in matchup and comparison data.
  In WSDM, 2016. URL http://www.cs.cornell.edu/~shuochen/pubs/wsdm16_chen.pdf.

Zhengxing Chen, Yizhou Sun, Magy Seif El-nasr, and Truong-Huy D. Nguyen. Player skill
  decomposition in multiplayer online battle arenas. In Meaningful Play, 2016. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/1702.06253.

Pierre Dangauthier, Ralf Herbrich, Tom Minka, and Thore Graepel. TrueSkill Through Time:
  Revisiting the History of Chess. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages
  931­938. MIT Press, January 2008. URL https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/
  publication/trueskill-through-time-revisiting-the-history-of-chess/.

Mark E. Glickman. Parameter estimation in large dynamic paired comparison experiments.
  Applied Statistics, 48:377­394, 1999. URL http://www.glicko.net/research/glicko.pdf.

Mark E. Glickman. Dynamic paired comparison models with stochastic variances. Journal of
  Applied Statistics, 28:673­689, 2001. URL http://www.glicko.net/research/dpcmsv.pdf.

Shengbo Guo, Scott Sanner, Thore Graepel, and Wray Buntine. Score-based bayesian skill
  learning. In ECML, 2012. URL http://users.rsise.anu.edu.au/~ssanner/Papers/sbsl_
  ecml2012.pdf.

Ralf Herbrich, Tom Minka, and Thore Graepel. TrueSkill(TM): A Bayesian Skill Rating
  System. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 569­576. MIT
  Press, January 2007. URL https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/publication/
  trueskilltm-a-bayesian-skill-rating-system/.

Joshua E. Menke, Shane Reese, and Tony R. Martinez. Hierarchical models for estimating
  individual ratings from group competitions. 2006. URL http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/
  viewdoc/summary?doi=10.1.1.533.1843.

                                                            23
T. Minka, J.M. Winn, J.P. Guiver, S. Webster, Y. Zaykov, B. Yangel, A. Spengler, and
  J. Bronskill. Chess Analysis example. Infer.NET documentation, 2014a. URL http:
  //research.microsoft.com/infernet/docs/Chess%20Analysis.aspx.

T. Minka, J.M. Winn, J.P. Guiver, S. Webster, Y. Zaykov, B. Yangel, A. Spengler, and J. Bron-
  skill. Infer.NET 2.6, 2014b. URL http://research.microsoft.com/infernet. Microsoft
  Research Cambridge.

Thomas P. Minka. Expectation propagation for approximate bayesian inference. In Uncertainty
  in AI, pages 362­369, 2001. URL https://tminka.github.io/papers/ep/.

Martin Riedmiller and Heinrich Braun. A Direct Adaptive Method for Faster Backpropagation
  Learning: The RPROP Algorithm. In IEEE International Conference on neural networks,
  1993.

Francisco J. R. Ruiz and Fernando Perez-Cruz. A generative model for predicting outcomes in
  college basketball. Journal of Quantitative Analysis in Sports, 11(1), 2015.

                                                            24
